docs: Add REST endpoints migration guide (#8011)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/migrations/rest.md

# REST Endpoints Migration

Migrate your REST endpoints to the Stargate ones. {synopsis}

## Deprecation of Legacy REST Endpoints

The Cosmos SDK versions v0.39 and earlier provided REST endpoints to query the state and broadcast transactions. These endpoints are kept in Cosmos SDK v0.40 (Stargate), but they are marked as deprecated, and will be removed in v.41. We call these endpoints legacy REST endpoints.

Some important information concerning all legacy REST endpoints:

- Most of these endpoints are backwards-comptatible. All breaking changes are described in the next section.

> - In particular, these endpoints still output Amino JSON. Cosmos v0.40 introduced Protobuf as the default encoding library throughout the codebase, but legacy REST endpoints are one of the few places in the codebase where the encoding is hardcoded to Amino. For more information about Protobuf and AMino, please read our [encoding guide](../core/encoding.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In particular, these endpoints still output Amino JSON. Cosmos v0.40 introduced Protobuf as the default encoding library throughout the codebase, but legacy REST endpoints are one of the few places in the codebase where the encoding is hardcoded to Amino. For more information about Protobuf and Amino, please read our [encoding guide](../core/encoding.md).
```

- All legacy REST endpoints include a [HTTP deprecation header](https://tools.ietf.org/id/draft-dalal-deprecation-header-01.html) which links to this document.

## Breaking Changes in Legacy REST Endpoints

| Legacy REST Endpoint      | Description        | Breaking Change                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| ------------------------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `GET /txs/{hash}`         | Query tx by hash   | Endpoint will error when trying to output non-Amino txs (e.g. IBC txs).                                                                                                                                                                    |

> | `GET /txs`                | Query tx by events | Endpoint will error when trying to output non-Amino txs (e.g. IBC txs).                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: > Endpoint will error when trying to output non-Amino txs (e.g. IBC txs).                       

This doesn't sound clear to me. Can we reword it and describe what are the _non amino txs_?

Author: makes sense 👍

| `GET /staking/validators` | Get all validators | BondStatus is now a protobuf enum instead of an int32, and JSON serialized using its protobuf name, so expect query parameters like `?status=BOND_STATUS_{BONDED,UNBONDED,UNBONDING}` as opposed to `?status={bonded,unbonded,unbonding}`. |

## Migrating to New REST Endpoints

> Cosmos SDK v0.40 marks as deprecated the legacy REST endpoints, but provides for most legacy endpoint a new REST endpoint. These endpoints are automatically generated from [gRPC `Query` services](../building-modules/query-services.md) using [grpc-gateway](https://grpc-ecosystem.github.io/grpc-gateway/), so they are usually called gGPC-gateway REST endpoints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thanks to the Protocol Buffers migraion in v0.40 we are able to take advantage of a vast gRPC tools and solutions. For most of the legacy REST endpoints, Cosmos SDK v0.40 provides new REST endpoints generated from [gRPC `Query` services](../building-modules/query-services.md) using [grpc-gateway](https://grpc-ecosystem.github.io/grpc-gateway/). We usually call them _gGPC-gateway REST endpoints_.
```

> Thanks to the Protocol Buffers migraion in v0.40 we are able to take advantage of a vast gRPC tools and solutions. For most of the legacy REST endpoints, Cosmos SDK v0.40 provides new REST endpoints generated from [gRPC `Query` services](../building-modules/query-services.md) using [grpc-gateway](https://grpc-ecosystem.github.io/grpc-gateway/). We usually call them _gGPC-gateway REST endpoints_.

Author: ```suggestion
Thanks to the Protocol Buffers migration in v0.40 we are able to take advantage of a vast number of gRPC tools and solutions. For most of the legacy REST endpoints, Cosmos SDK v0.40 provides new REST endpoints generated from [gRPC `Query` services](../building-modules/query-services.md) using [grpc-gateway](https://grpc-ecosystem.github.io/grpc-gateway/). We usually call them _gGPC-gateway REST endpoints_.
```

> Some modules expose legacy `POST` endpoints to generate unsigned transactions for their `Msg`s. These `POST` endpoints have been removed. We recommend to use [service `Msg`s](../building-modules/msg-services.md) directly, and use Protobuf to generate client-side transaction generation. A guide can be found [here (TODO)](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/issues/7657).

Author: Added note in #7657

| `GET /staking/pool`                                                             | Get the current state of the staking pool                           | `GET /cosmos/staking/v1beta1/pool`                                                                    |
| `GET /staking/parameters`                                                       | Get the current staking parameter values                            | `GET /cosmos/staking/v1beta1/params`                                                                  |
| `POST /upgrade/*`                                                               | Create unsigned `Msg`s for upgrade                                  | N/A, use Protobuf directly                                                                            |
| `GET /upgrade/current`                                                          | Get the current plan                                                | `GET /cosmos/upgrade/v1beta1/current_plan`                                                            |

> | `GET /upgrade/applied_plan/{name}`                                              | Get a previously applied plan                                       | `GET /cosmos/upgrade/v1beta1/applied/{name}`                                                          |

Reviewer 2: Is this table generated or you manually filled it?

Author: Manually, with some VS-code shortcuts sometimes.

# REST Endpoints Migration

> Migrate your REST endpoints to the Stargate ones. {synopsis}

Reviewer 3: Why do we have `{synopsis}`?

Author: It shows a nice little box 😮  https://docs.cosmos.network/master/basics/app-anatomy.html
